---
layout: post
title: "Implementing Stikhoi"
date: 2020-05-10 14:00:00
category: [coding, elachista]
author: Patrick Callahan
---
*N.B. This is from before I re-booted the theme and needs to be updated (5/19/20)*

I'm currently mid-build of the first template for a simple, single-text HTML template and tutorial.

As began building the template, I realized Elachista needed specific styling for poetry in class designations for HTML, styles in its CSS, and possibly some associated Javascript.

Some years ago, an acquaintance from my wife's days in grad school in Bryn Mawr, Dennis McHenry had developed something that I thought worked quite elegantly and simply. I only remembered it from his days maintaining a blog, [The Campvs](http://thecampvs.com/). He's since migrated it over to [CodePen](https://codepen.io/denmch/details/acEIA/).

You can read in detail his summary of his settings, now called "STIKHOI", over at his Pen. The summary of the necessary HTML elements will be in the HTML text template that is currently being built. But as for the project journal, here is what was done today:

1. Migrated STIKHOI css elements over to the `_base.scss` file.
2. Created a `stikhoi.js` file with the small javascript snippet in a new `js` folder inside `/assets`. (The folder rather than just the file itself since I'll be needed more javascript when it comes to building the JSON viewer later)
3. Successfully tested the HTML template for suppressing line numbers and indentation.

What remains to be done with STIKHOI?

1. Successfully link the javascript to `includes` and `layout`.
2. Successfully indent elegaic couplets.
3. Successfully present every 5th line number.
